---
layout: page
title:  Glossary
date:   25-01-17 14:04:00
category: doc
order: 5
---

* **Basin of attraction**: A set of points (initial conditions) in the phase space from which a dynamical system spontaneously moves to a particular attractor.

* **Bifurcation**: A sudden qualitative change in the behaviour of a dynamical system given a small change in the system parameter values. A critical bifurcation can be indicative of a significant positive or negative transition between steady-states. 

* **Dilution rate**: Inflow of substrate, nutrient or medium per volume of reactor or culture.

* **Eigenvalue**: The value of a parameter for which a differential equation has a non-zero solution for given conditions. Used to determine the stability of fixed-points from the Jacobian of the ODEs.

* **Fixed-point**: The fixed-point of a function is such that it maps to itself in the functional domain, e.g. for a function $f(x)$, $p$ is a fixed-point if $f(p) = p$. In stability theory for dynamical systems, fixed-points can represent equilibrium positions in a autonomous system of differential equations (i.e., $f(x) = 0$). Stability may be determined by examining the response to small perturbations from the fixed-points.

* **Gibbs Free Energy**: The energy associated with a chemical reaction that can be used to do work. A negative Gibbs Free Energy ($\Delta$G) indicates a favourable reaction can (spontaneously) take place depending on temperature.

* **Jacobian Matrix**: A matrix of first-order partial differential equations of a set of a vector function (i.e., in MI-SIM, the vector of model ODEs). Eigenvalues of the Jacobian determine the behaviour of trajectories close to the system equilibria (fixed-points). These trajectories can be thought of as perturbations in the parameter space containing the fixed-points. The trajectories, evaluated as a function of time, will determine if the equilibria are stable or unstable. 

* **Linear Stability Analysis**: Linearisation of a non-linear function close to a given point (e.g., fixed- or equlibrium-point). This can be done by calculating the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix for all $f(x)_n = 0$.

* **Motif**: The  module or simple network describing the interaction between biotic and abiotic components and reactions in the modelled system.

* **Phase portrait**: A graphical representation of the dynamical trajectories or bifurcations occurring in the phase plane generated by the solutions to the system of ODEs.

* **Routh-Hurwitz Stability Criterion**: A mathematical method to determine whether all the roots of a polynomial lie in the left-half plane (i.e., if all the eigenvalues of the dynamical system are negative, then the fixed-point is stable).

* **Steady-state**: A process or system is at steady-state if the variables that describe its behaviour are constant with time. For example, in a biological system, this may occur in a chemostat when one organism is washed-out from the system and the other reaches equilibrium between removal and growth. A stable steady-state may become unstable if a parameter passes through a Hopf bifurcation, resulting in a limit cycle or periodic oscillatory behaviour. 

